I pledge allegiance to the flag of the
United States of America and to the
republ for which it stands one nation
under God indivisible with libery and
justice for
all the chair ask for approval uh motion
to approve the
agenda I'll make a motion to approve the
agenda I have a first do I have a
second second it okay I have a first and
a second to approve the agenda agenda
all those in favor please say I I I
those opposed okay the agenda is
adopted first on the agenda is comments
from the audience it's limited to two
minutes and it's on the agenda items
only this is your time to talk after
this any interruptions and um you'll be
asked to
leave so first up Doug Patterson on the
budget you got a
time I I get to be first wonderful um so
relative to the budget um I would ask
that um an account be created U
specifically for donations for forensic
audit um I know people who already have
volunteered over
and um in terms of budgeting for the
forensic audit um there there might be
more to follow thank
you next is Moren
Patterson let us pray heavenly father
thank you so much for all the blessings
you give us every day and for this
gorgeous weather we have please let your
light shine on the Del liberations and
decisions at this meeting in Jesus
Christ's name we pray today a friend
called governor's office and verified a
10% raise the legislature had voted and
approved and the governor signed it this
10% raise for West Bonner County School
District started July 1st for certified
teachers with the three and a half to 4%
additional offer by our board that makes
it a 13 and A2 to 14% raise additionally
there's 9% increase in benefits which
the district is paying for those
complaining about concern for students
asking more seems to be carried
away I compared last year wages of
certified teachers in West boner County
with Lakeland School District and found
60% of our teachers were making the same
or more without taking into account the
longevity stiens Lakeland mean household
income is
$65,000 approximately Priest River mean
household income is approximately 4
5,000 by the way the 20,000 claimed at
many of the meetings to return the E Ela
curriculum was really only
$1,560
55 I have a copy of the receipt thank
you very
much
okay next up is Whitney
[Music]
irman
I am just here to plea that you go with
your original budget um with the
emphasis on salaries um Miss Patterson's
information is incorrect um you have to
take in account that we are only funded
for so many positions we've talked about
that a million times um our teachers are
paid less than any other District in a
100 miles um I can tell you that as a
first year teacher in this District um
and there is nowhere to live and some of
our teachers are driving 100 plus miles
to go to school I was driving 90 miles a
day for my teaching position um because
I love this school and I'm passionate
about our students I wanted to retire
here and that is not possible for me now
because I can't afford it and other
aspects of My Life um another thing I'm
concerned about is if we do adopt the
budget with a 3% raise um you promised
during your interview Mr Durst that we
would have co-curricular activities but
last week you said that those extra
funds could go to co-curricular
activities and quite frankly we don't
have a lot of good faith with you right
now and I'm wondering um how much of
that extra stipulation fund would go to
co-curricular activities and the other
gaps in our budgets and if that's going
to be clarified soon um pay your
teachers you guys talk about test scores
you guys talked about all these things
this 10% raise really is nothing and it
was really it's already what we were
planning on um and this change of tune
is really frustrating and our budget was
directed by our incredible business
manager that has done nothing but defend
you guys and has done nothing but fall
under your directives and I don't know
what changed in the past month that
these allegations are towards her but go
with the budget you guys already looked
at it's it's our teachers deserve it and
our kids deserve it thank
you next up
Merle
Brumley as we seek to approve the budget
for 2023 2024 I would like to address
the largest amount of it teacher
salaries I quite frankly have been
appalled by statements and tweets I have
heard and read in the last week trusty
rage States teachers aren't worth a
raise and Mr Dirt dur tweets anyone with
two years of college I'll give you a job
I don't believe this goes along with my
definition of good faith
Barony I have three grandsons who attend
West Bonner County Schools they are
guaranteed by the state of Idaho and
education apparently they are not
guaranteed that education by Mr Durst
and trusty rutage it is my understanding
that part of the district's 5-year plan
was to recruit and retain high quality
teachers this plan was overwhelmingly a
applauded and embraced by the board when
it was being presented to the public now
it seems it to have been tossed aside in
favor of the who cares approach how can
you complain about test scores when you
want to have less than Optimum
instruction at negotiations on Monday
July 10th Jared use made an excellent
presentation I am sorry that his
presentation wasn't seen by every Patron
in this District like Jared said we pay
Mr Durst who has no experience or
credentials the state average salary why
do the teachers deserve
Less in my opinion there is no reason
why the district is choosing to treat
the teachers this way please consider
how unethical you look return to
negotiations in good faith and figure
out the largest portion of this budget
so we can move on to the next issue in
the district perhaps the curriculum no
one approved thank
you
next up is Morgan
strange I would like to start by
thanking you the board members for being
here this evening and allowing us the
parents community members of this
District to have a voice as a parent of
four children that attend school in West
Bonner County School District I urge you
to find a solution in the budget for our
school resource offic
our children deserve to have protection
they deserve to have someone that they
trust to go in to go to in any situation
and our children deserve to know that
their safety is a top priority also as a
coach of the high school softball team
and a parent of four children that play
sports and participate in
extracurricular activities I hope you
can also find a solution in our budget
that provides extracurricular activities
and co-curricular activities for our
students Keith you you recently stood up
in front of a group of people that you
feel has the same goals as yourself and
you spoke to them about our test scores
and how West Berner county is the lowest
across the board in academics if the
board takes extracurricular activities
and co-curricular activities away from
these students these children these test
scores that you desperately want to
improve they will continue to lower
attendance will decrease and graduating
classes will as well our students need
these extracurricular and co-curricular
activities to stay motivated in school
to keep them out of drugs and alcohol
and to give them a reason to stay in
school to get good grades and to strive
for the academic Excellency we all hope
for them our community we are a
community that celebrates under the
Friday Night Lights while the band plays
our fight song close scoring basketball
games and home runs in the fifth inning
I'm asking you the board to find a
solution for our children's safety just
like you have found a solution for your
own take a look in the back of the room
there they are doing their job
protecting and serving this community
find a solution for extracurricular and
co-curricular ular activities our
children need these to learn other
important life skills as sportsmanship
leadership teamwork integrity and
strength thank
[Applause]
you next up Sandra
Brower hi my name is Andy Brower um my
first topic is the budget um I I was
hope I hope that you guys will do a
presentation for us today um to account
for the information regarding the new
proposed budget I was kind of hoping for
a hearing but I I appreciate the public
comment but I still would like a hearing
I know that you have allowed public
comment um so that's great but I would
like to know the changes um for people
to understand you had public comment
last time during the budget hearing and
there are people here that actually said
they they didn't understand what was
happening with our budget yet there's no
explanation with the changes so I would
encourage that um also I'm curious about
does the beginning balance where does
the levy money collected for the
curriculum where is that located in the
budget for the curriculum that has not
been approved by this board yet even
though there was mentioned that it was
approved um during a public uh Town Town
County town meeting or whatever how many
teachers admin and support staff
positions are budgeted for I I also
think the community would like to know
what staff those dollars are supporting
um it's kind of vague on on what we're
doing did you budget for a resource
officer due to the increased gun
violence in our in our country and the
over overwhelming number of children
killed while attending uh Public Schools
not not to budget for a resource officer
would be negligent at the very least um
I hope you'll address this in your
presentation if we get one When the Levy
failed it was due in part to the
promises made by Scott hurden and other
legislators community members and board
members that did not need a levy due to
the increased funding from the state
including a large raise to the salary I
listened to a presentation made by Keith
Russy this weekend where he said he did
not think the teachers deserved a raise
um super unhappy about that um and and
luckily you have your your audio
photographer here that put it on Twitter
so everybody now has heard what you had
to say so it's very unfortunate um that
you did that um is the board and
superintendent not interested in
retaining and recruiting the very best
for our
students IP I'm happy to see the
contract presented on I'm just happy
about IP because it's risk management
and you guys need to be
protected great thank
[Applause]
you next up is Katie
elzer thanks I just want to start first
with a question I hope you guys can
address when you get to I crimp uh prior
there was rumors made about a reducing
or eliminating Community use of
buildings and Fields for our
Recreational Sports and other sports due
to Insurance demands um even though
users of it are providing their own
insurance coverage so I was just curious
if that had been discussed at all with I
crimp um so if you guys could just when
you get to that part address that that
would be
great um at the hearing or this is all
we have as a summary statement I know
that Mr or trusty rled and truste brown
did not agree with the previous budget
and they said there was things missing
and information missing but I feel like
we've gotten less information and if um
Miss Brown need additional information
on the prior one I don't see here where
it doesn't even show where the funds are
going to go and what categories and
anything that's been changed as to the
subcategories I agree it was a large
document but I did work through it and
here I only have the one-page summary so
I'm I as Miss Brower said hope that
there's going to be a presentation about
that actually shows the categories in
which that goes to
um I'm concerned with not going with the
previous budget because everyone's
stating this is just temporary so we can
pay bills we will amend it if that's the
case why not go with the one that had
ours in hours put into it as opposed to
the one that had someone who just
started the job as first time ever being
an intend a superintendent came up with
within a week of being employed the
other one had a lot of input and a lot
of time put in there if you're going to
amend it I think it shows good faith
going into negotiations and just in
general good faith into this community
if you actually use the one that had
work put into it by many people who had
invested interest in the budget um so I
think that would be a better route
because if you want to go with Mr dur
number you can always amend it at that
time but I feel like you're not putting
the good faith effort out there to be
transparent when all we get is one page
and there's not any modifications thank
[Applause]
you
okay next up um I need a motion to
consider consideration and approval of
the 2023 2024
budget do you need a motion to bring it
to the table correct yeah okay I'll make
a motion to bring it to the table okay I
have a I have a first I need a second
I'll second that I have a second from
trust or vice chair Brown first by
trusty Hall
discussion
I would ask that if um Mr Durst has a
presentation to give regarding that this
current budget that would be helpful or
would is able to answer any of the
questions that were brought that would
be helpful before we go
further Mr chairman uh trusty Hall thank
you for that
um those comments I I would start off by
I appreciate the questions that um those
and public comment brought
forth to help kind of provide some
context around where these numbers are
coming from uh the only number that's
different on this proposed budget than
the prior budget that had been noticed
publicly um in the paper is on the
salaries line all other places it's the
same and
um this number is maintaining the
commitment that the board has at least
verbally spoken about with regard to our
classified staff raising our minimum
salary for classified staff to $15 an
hour this this reflects that um this
also uh allows for
um some funding of our uh co-curricular
extracurricular activities the total
amount of that hasn't been determined
yet because that is obviously a moving
Target at this point but I I think there
is certainly a commitment from from my
office and from the trustees I can't
speak for them but I suspect they they
also want to make sure those things are
happening and that's this budget allows
for that um but and the difference is
that we're starting off the base 3.5%
salary increase for all CL all certified
staff um a couple things to be aware of
that that may not have been communicated
well and if that's to the extent that
that's my fault then I'll I'll own that
um currently the the amount of money
we're getting from the state of
Idaho doesn't cover
um we would have to be pay let me back
up for just a second we have a fund
balance which you can think of in terms
of our district savings
account and part of that's from money
that we've that we've saved from not
spending all of our money we get every
year some of that's from federal funding
that we've got Federal funding that
we've gotten through the co process
through Esser funds um our proposed
budget is actually utilizing a
significant amount of our savings as it
stands even in this proposed
budget and um so to say that we're Hing
we're holding money back and we're not
spending money that we're that we should
have to spend isn't accurate we're
spending every penny that we are getting
this fiscal year is being spent and it's
all being allocated towards the
categories in which it was intended so
salaries or facilities or benefits all
those things are happening but the thing
that's missing that that I think hasn't
been happening in the public
conversation is we're spending our our
savings account to keep things afloat
and and that's to me from a from a
fiscal standpoint not ideal to have
ongoing costs paid for by
one-time um uh Revenue source which is
what the federal money largely is and
so I also want to make sure that we
didn't uh with regard to the certified
staff salaries I felt it was prudent to
not tie the hands of our of our of our
negotiation team I've said that before
they are well within their rights to
negotiate an agreement that has a higher
salary increase for for certified staff
and if they do that we'll modify the
budget accordingly um but at this point
this is a fiscally prudent budget that
we can afford that doesn't utilize as
much of our as much of our savings still
uses some of our savings but not quite
as much and allows us to kind of move
forward and start doing the sorts of
things the district needs to do to pay
bills so
um if there are further questions from
the from the board I'd be Happ to answer
them if there's specific questions but
that's kind of a overarching um
piece Mr chair if I might ask a question
sure Mr D so you're saying that this
then uh these dollar amounts would keep
the co-curricular and
sports to some degree in is for like the
rest of this part of the year and then
January starts like a whole new ball
game or Mr chairman uh trusty Hall it
would be my intention with this budget
that we would be able to pay for about
three4 of
our previous fiscal Year's costs for
co-curricular and
extracurricular um again that number
could could move just a little bit
because we don't have as firm of numbers
on that issue as we have had in the past
we still have issues around
transportation we have some issues
around um liability insurance and those
sorts of things that that aren't
entirely decided as of yet but by and
large I I think think we could say
pretty confidently that about 3/4 of our
cost will be accounted for in that and
that we will have the ability to pay for
so let me clarify one thing is that
already the board approved 116,000 and
that's that's actually been built in to
the budget I think that's actually maybe
part of salaries and benefits at this
point yeah so there is a gap of if if
extracurricular co-curricular stayed at
the same rate that it is this 2022
2023 there would be about a 280,000
deficit and that's what the groups that
um trustee Barton and I have been
talking about brainstorming and we hope
to bring forth some of those ideas and
that that in terms of the overall
picture of negotiations we need to do
the whole piece of the negotiations
figure that out and potentially look at
the extracurricular co-curricular
simultaneously once we finish up
negotiations so we're working the whole
all those different pieces but that's
what right now based on the spread sheet
that um Mr Hughes Jared Hughes put
together and and you know with all the
numbers because he's the one that has
crunched it and we've double checked it
that's where we we've got 116 already
here we're looking at a deficit of about
280 okay so I just want to clarify
something so basically um what Vice
chair Brown was saying is that basically
you're saying well we we either pay our
teachers a
non-competitive amount for salary or
co-curriculars so you're making us
choose between our teachers or
co-curriculars now so trusty Mr chairman
trusty Barton what I'm what I'm saying
is it's the board's decision as to how
they want to allocate their funds what
I'm saying is that it's my
recommendation that we don't dip too
much into our savings account for
ongoing costs to the extent that the
board wants to do something different
that's clearly within their purview and
not mine um but I do think we have to be
cognizant of the fact that we would
likely end up in a fiscal emergency um
Financial emergency by March or April if
if we proceed in a way that we that's
not financially um sustainable and given
the limitation limiting number of
options that the district has to
increase revenue between now and then um
I just have concerns
around the over promising of of our of
our to our teachers or to anyone frankly
and so I I'm trying to be cognizant of
that in this particular piece but again
I will yield to to the collectiv wisdm
of the board it feels it wants to go a
different direction then by all means
I'll um Implement whatever budget that
you guys provide to me and I do want to
make one footnote during negotiations
which day is it on Monday um we did put
you know one of the things that both
parties signed off on is that we would
look at this as a um they recognize that
this is we need to pay our bills bottom
line we need to pay our bills um um and
that we agreed that this was you know we
were looking at this as a this is a
temporary budget dependent on
negotiations and final approval of all
the different parties so the bottom line
is yes we may go back to the other but
this is now the one that's been in front
of the public so we can't really go back
to the $6 million one because that was
Prior this is the one that was out there
the bottom line is that we need to pay
the bills we've got to get they have to
be read the budget has to be um uploaded
actually has to be submitted to the
state by July 15th that's 3 days um and
then we have to figure out some of those
out um outstanding contracts that maybe
there's already letters of intent there
anything that might be because contracts
were supposed to be signed July 1st um
if there's any rolling over we need to
put a letter with those contracts
stating that they will be updated based
on after final approval of the
negotiations agreement or final approval
of the budget so that really this is to
try to get our bills paid get us moving
forward but in negotiations we agreed
that this was a temporary Budget moving
forward we would um it would depend on
the final negotiations and
approvals and I don't know chair rutage
would you say that was any or is that
any different was that what you heard as
well at that negotiations meeting on
Monday yes
okay okay any other
comments okay um I just felt that the
first uh initial budget um I had the
same concerns as superintendent dur had
that we were I had the same concerns
that uh superintendent dur had with our
first initial budget um that we were
going too far in reserves and we had
nothing for co-curricular ERS or Sports
uh because of that uh superintendent
Durst has prepared a temporary budget
that will keep the district running
smoothly while he hires
um staff and necessary um um and
produces detailed and accurate financial
statements that we need we need to
create a legitimate budget proposal with
the proper financial transparency for
the district I fully support his plans
for getting the district back on the
right track with with its
finances with that are there any further
comments um I think I think the only
other comment is that I you know really
do I do really two
comments the fund balance I mean I the
fund balance is a savings account we
know that um it is this year we're able
to keep things running somewhat smoothly
because we had that extra money the the
problem is is that we don't know if it
makes sense to go out in November that's
a board decision to go for a levy or in
if we don't go November then it is
actually may so we have again it's a
risk when we go out in May it's again
what a crapshoot excuse my French but
it's it's really we don't know if it's
going to pass or not pass so having a
little bit of fund balance and the right
amount I'm not saying we may argue and
we may decide let's incre you know let's
use a little bit more fund balance but
in the overall picture we have to re
realize that that fund balance may help
with dealing with some facilities issues
that we're not expecting some if the
levy H if we have Levy issues again um
there's a whole bunch of things that
that fund balance sort of has to be
looking at in terms of covering certain
things that might crop up doesn't mean
that the teachers the certified and
classified and our staff is any less
important it's just trying to balance
the overall picture and then seeing how
much the community feels that they can
really raise for extracurricular
co-curricular I mean if they you know we
need to need to figure out what the bar
is there so there's a lot of moving
parts and this is the first step of
those moving Parts is to get us so we
can pay our bills and we don't go
default on our bills and I've actually
had some um family members uh you know
in the community that have and not I'll
clarify not my family members other
families that have children here um that
have indicated that they would be um
more than happy to donate things for the
co-curricular if there's a shortfall so
there there is definitely a lot of talk
of people looking at being able to keep
that running and keep it afloat and I
think we're just trying to find the
right Avenue to get those donations in I
think that's the bottom line is what's
the most efficient way to get those
donations in people are feeling
comfortable out people trust the source
and then it can be donated to the to to
the school district it doesn't all it
wouldn't come to the school district
directly it would be through a third
party that then would be putting it in
and that third and it conceivably the
district could go back and seek
reimbursement from that party so there's
a whole bunch of pieces that are still
out there that need to be decided in the
whole equation okay with that all those
in favor of consideration um I think we
need to Mo make a motion I'm sorry sorry
okay I need a motion to um vote on um
the approval of the 2023 2024 I will
make a motion to approve a temporary
2024 budget okay trusty Hall makes a
motion to approve the 2023 2024
temporary
budget temporary that's what I said I
second
that no I'm sorry contemporary budget
all and I have a second by Vice chair
Brown all those in favor say I I those
opposed okay the motion carries pay the
bills pay the bills pay the bills next
up the new business uh I need a motion
for approval of the iic insurance policy
for year 2023
2024 um I will make a motion I will
bring the motion I make a motion to
bring the approval of the I crimp
insurance policy year 2023 2024 to the
table for explanation okay do I have a
second I'll second that okay Vice chair
Brown seconds debate just to clarify
this is the joint Powers agreement that
the school district has with this I
crimp it's I Crim's insurance plan is
the same with all the different
jurisdictions local local jurisdictions
in Idaho this is the joint Powers
agreement that those they ask their
memberships to um to sign and so that's
what I would be making I would make a
motion that we approve the joint Powers
approval to sign the joint Powers
agreement okay for with I crimp okay I
have a motion on the floor to accept the
joint Powers agreement um insurance
policy 2022 2023
2024 that okay trusty Barton seconds all
those in favor say I I I I I those
opposed okay the motion
carries okay next up on the agenda I
need a uh motion to bring to the floor
approval to change the time and place of
the July regular monthly board meeting
uh Mr chair I'll make a motion to bring
the consideration approval to change the
time and place of the July regular
monthly board meeting okay I have a
first and do I have second that okay I
have a second from Vice shair Brown um I
want to clarify I know that the place in
July was going to be Priest Lake
Elementary School and um I don't know if
you want to I can quickly clarify the
2023 20 24 budget since it's approved
right now the clock starts ticking for 2
weeks we can't hold our monthly July
meeting next week because in Idaho code
it requires two weeks after the approval
of the budget which puts it to July 26th
um the pl reason for maybe suggesting or
um recommending a change in place is
because if we're going to talk about
extracurricular co-curricular and we are
hoping to have a presentation on that it
might be this venue might be better a
better place to have the venue for that
presentation okay um and that would be
why looking at it so the recommendation
or my motion would be um or the
suggestion would be is to change it to
July 26 same time 6:00 p.m. here at the
high school um cafeteria for the reason
stated okay do I have a motion to change
the location to the high school
cafeteria of July
26th
what day is it Wednesday it's a
Wednesday it's a Wednesday it's no
different just a two weeks out I we're
looking for a motion or a second no I'm
making a motion okay I'll make a motion
to go ahead and um change the time and
the place for the regular July monthly
board meeting to the lman high school on
the 26th of July okay do I have a second
I'll second okay all those in favor of
the July 2 six uh date and place of the
lman high school please say I I those
opposed okay the motion
carries next up I need a motion for
consideration and approval of fuel bids
to bring to the floor I'll make a motion
to bring the 2023 2024 consideration
approval of fuel fuel bids to the floor
I'll second that okay um I'm asked
Brandy our board clerk to come up and
make a presentation on that
okay
so so I have the um the fuel bids here
and it looks like five bids got speak
into the mic not sorry um five bids were
sent out by the business manager to um
different fuel companies and four of
them came back returned to
Sender um and of those of those five one
came back with a bid uh so would you
mind stating your name
and your title for the record for the
record oh I'm sorry sorry for the record
Brandy par board
clerk is that okay
um so I I made a couple well I tried to
make a couple calls today to figure out
why these would have been returned to
Sender because it seems as if they were
all hand addressed on the envelopes and
um the one that was sent to city
services it had the wrong address um
actually an address that the G that I
spoke to on the phone um she said that
she had never picked up mail at a PO Box
like everything has always come to a
street address there and then I have
another one for Northern Energy that
came
back as well as a
meraas um both of those in Sand Point
and then one for um Corner Shell in
Priest River and and I wasn't able to
verify what that
was so that's that's what I have the
only bid that I um have here that came
back was from the co-energy
um preer Family oil
okay uh Steepy sent these
out okay there's any there's no comment
public comment at this time sorry oh
sorry no comment sorry so
um Brandy did you do you um when you
talked with them were they interested in
putting in a bid um I did not I did not
ask I
actually orderorder please because
because the um the bidding time was
already closed um I just was trying to
verify um the addresses as to I was just
trying to figure out why they all came
back okay with with that um I need a
thank you thank you okay um I need a
motion to table the approval of the fuel
bids until we have uh adequate
bids I'll make a motion to table the
fuel bids on um and to I don't know if
we need to specify a certain um period
of time um do we need to say July 30th I
don't know if they'll be back in time
for July they might be back in Ju by
July 26th but that would be preferable
so Brandy could you put out um a new a
correct request for bids to all of those
now that you have the correct addresses
in contacts I sure
can and what was the date that you
wanted on us the 26 if we can get them
back by then well if we if we did get it
by the 26th we won't be able to post
them so just say July say July 30th and
then hopefully we can I mean we need to
have them how about July 31st that's the
last day of the month that sounds better
thank you for oh yeah because Sunday is
the 30th July so the last day of the
month is July 30th and then we can have
them for August
meeting okay thank you just cuz we need
to be able to post them so people can
see them
okay so I have a first to to table them
do I have a second second okay Troy rol
seconds all those in favor tbling the
fuel bids until we have um adequate bids
please say I I I okay that's Ted I make
a motion to adjourn I have a motion for
adjourn okay meeting
adjourned